crnpy tutorial
==============

Defining a chemical reaction network
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A chemical reaction network (CRN) object can be created from an SBML
file:

.. code:: python

      >>> from crnpy.crn import *
      >>> crn = from_sbml("examples/data/sbml/enzyme.xml")

or a list of reactions:

.. code:: python

      >>> reactions = ['e + a (k_1)<->(k1) ea',
      ...              'e + b (k_2)<->(k2) eb',
      ...              'ea + b (k_3)<->(k3) eab',
      ...              'eb + a (k_4)<->(k4) eab',
      ...              'eab ->(k5) e + p']
      >>> bi_uni_random = from_react_strings(reactions)

The list of reactions can be read from a text file, using
*from\_react\_file*:

.. code:: python

      >>> another_net = from_react_file(reactionfilename)

A string specifying a reaction must contain either the characters "->"
for unidirectional reactions, or the characters "<->" for reversible
reactions. Reversible reactions will be converted to two separate
reactions.

The symbol ">" can be followed by an expression in parenthesis, which
will be, by default, interpreted as a generalised kinetic parameter. In
other words, the reaction rate will be set to the expression in
parenthesis multiplied by the concentrations of the reactant species. In
alternative, one can specify the rate between parenthesis, and use
*from\_react\_strings* or *from\_react\_file* with the option *rate =
True*. For example, the network created with the command

.. code:: python

      >>> one_react_net = from_react_strings(["a + b ->(k1) c"])

coincides with the network created by the command

.. code:: python

      >>> one_react_net = from_react_strings(["a + b ->(k1*a*b) c"], rate = True)

The expression in parenthesis must be a string that can be successfully
converted to a *SymPy* expression. Numeric values are of course
accepted. Stoichiometric coefficients in the reactant and product
complexes are instead specified by integers preceding the species, as in
the following example:

.. code:: python

      >>> one_react_net = from_react_strings(["2a + b ->(k*a**2*b/(a+b+c)) 3 c"], rate = True)

The symbol "<" can also be preceded by an expression in parenthesis,
which will be used to set the rate of the reverse reaction.

A reaction id can be specified before the reactant, and must be followed
by a colon. For example, we can specify the last reaction as

.. code:: python

      >>> one_react_net = from_react_strings(["r_in: 2a + b ->(k*a**2*b/(a+b+c)) 3 c"], rate = True)

If an id is not specified, reactions are assigned an id of the form
*r\_n*, with n an integer, starting from 0. If a reversible reaction is
defined, for example

.. code:: python

      >>> rev_react_net = from_react_strings(["r1: a + b <-> c"])

then two reactions will be created, one with id r1 with a + b as a
reactant and c as product, and one with id r1\_rev with c as reactant
and a + b as product. As shown in the last example, kinetic parameters
are optional. In the same example, reaction r1 is assigned a parameter
symbol k\_r1, and the reverse reaction is assigned the parameter symbol
k\_r1\_rev.

Comments can be added to a reaction file using the symbol "#". Anything
appearing after the hash sign will ignored.

Exploring chemical reaction networks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Attributes of a CRN object include the network species, complexes, and
reactions:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn.species, crn.complexes
      (['E', 'ES', 'P', 'S'], ['E + S', 'ES', 'E + P'])

      >>> for r in crn.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      veq: E + S ->(comp*veq_kon) ES
      veq_rev: ES ->(comp*veq_koff) E + S
      vcat: ES ->(comp*vcat_kcat) E + P

      >>> for r in bi_uni_random.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      r0: a + e ->(k1) ea
      r0_rev: ea ->(k_1) a + e
      r1: b + e ->(k2) eb
      r1_rev: eb ->(k_2) b + e
      r2: b + ea ->(k3) eab
      r2_rev: eab ->(k_3) b + ea
      r3: a + eb ->(k4) eab
      r3_rev: eab ->(k_4) a + eb
      r4: eab ->(k5) e + p

Available matrices associated to the reaction network are the
stoichiometric matric *stoich\_matrix*, the matrix of stoichiometric
coefficients *complex\_matrix* (often called Y in the literature), the
Laplacian of the complex graph *laplacian*, the incidence matrix of the
complex graph *incidence\_matrix*.

Special methods are available to print some matrices. For example, for
the stoichiometry matrix:

.. code:: python

      >>> bi_uni_random.print_stoich_matrix()
          r0  r0_rev  r1  r1_rev  r2  r2_rev  r3  r3_rev  r4
    a   | -1       1   0       0   0       0  -1       1   0 |
    b   |  0       0  -1       1  -1       1   0       0   0 |
    e   | -1       1  -1       1   0       0   0       0   1 |
    ea  |  1      -1   0       0  -1       1   0       0   0 |
    eab |  0       0   0       0   1      -1   1      -1  -1 |
    eb  |  0       0   1      -1   0       0  -1       1   0 |
    p   |  0       0   0       0   0       0   0       0   1 |

Look at the system of ODEs associated to the network, and at the
conservations:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn.print_equations()
      dE/dt = -comp*E*S*veq_kon + comp*ES*vcat_kcat + comp*ES*veq_koff
      dES/dt = comp*E*S*veq_kon - comp*ES*vcat_kcat - comp*ES*veq_koff
      dP/dt = comp*ES*vcat_kcat
      dS/dt = -comp*E*S*veq_kon + comp*ES*veq_koff

      >>> for e in crn.cons_laws: print(e)
      ... 
      E + ES
      -E + P + S

Get the list of intermediate species:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn.intermediate_species
      ['E', 'ES', 'S']

Reduction
~~~~~~~~~

Eliminate the intermediate *ES* using quasi-steady state approximation:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn.qss('ES')
      >>> for r in crn.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      veq_vcat: E + S ->(comp*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(vcat_kcat + veq_koff)) E + P

Use a conservation to eliminate the enzyme, and check the new dynamics:

.. code:: python

      >>> from conslaw import ConsLaw
      >>> crn.remove_by_cons('E', ConsLaw('E + ES', 'Et'))
      >>> for r in crn.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      veq_vcat: S ->(comp*et*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(s*veq_kon + vcat_kcat + veq_koff)) p
      >>> crn.print_equations()
      dP/dt = comp*Et*S*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(S*veq_kon + vcat_kcat + veq_koff)
      dS/dt = -comp*Et*S*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(S*veq_kon + vcat_kcat + veq_koff)

In alternative, eliminate the constant species:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn = from_sbml("examples/data/sbml/enzyme.xml")
      >>> crn.qss('ES')
      >>> crn.constant_species
      ['e']
      >>> crn.remove_all_constants()
      >>> for r in crn.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      veq_vcat: S ->(comp*E*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(vcat_kcat + veq_koff)) P

Use rapid equilibrium instead (and the conservation law):

.. code:: python

      >>> crn = from_sbml("examples/data/sbml/enzyme.xml")
      >>> crn.rapid_eq(('ES', 'E + S'), cons_law = ('E', ConsLaw('E + ES', 'Et')))
      >>> for r in crn.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      vcat: S ->(comp*Et*vcat_kcat*veq_kon/(S*veq_kon + veq_koff)) P

Use a combination of the reduction methods:

.. code:: python

      >>> bi_uni_random.remove(rapid_eq = [('ea', 'e + a'), ('eb', 'e + b')], 
                               qss = ['eab'], 
                               cons_law = ('e', ConsLaw('e + ea + eb + eab', 'et')))
      >>> for r in bi_uni_random.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      r2_r4: a + b ->(et*k1*k3*k5*k_2/(a*b*k1*k3*k_2 + a*b*k2*k4*k_1 + a*k1*k5*k_2 + a*k1*k_2*k_3 + a*k1*k_2*k_4 + b*k2*k5*k_1 + b*k2*k_1*k_3 + b*k2*k_1*k_4 + k5*k_1*k_2 + k_1*k_2*k_3 + k_1*k_2*k_4)) p
      r3_r4: a + b ->(et*k2*k4*k5*k_1/(a*b*k1*k3*k_2 + a*b*k2*k4*k_1 + a*k1*k5*k_2 + a*k1*k_2*k_3 + a*k1*k_2*k_4 + b*k2*k5*k_1 + b*k2*k_1*k_3 + b*k2*k_1*k_4 + k5*k_1*k_2 + k_1*k_2*k_3 + k_1*k_2*k_4)) p

Merge reactions with the same reactant and product:

.. code:: python

      >>> bi_uni_random.merge_reactions()
      >>> for r in bi_uni_random.reactions: print(r)
      ... 
      r2_r4r3_r4: a + b ->(et*k5*(k1*k3*k_2 + k2*k4*k_1)/(a*b*k1*k3*k_2 + a*b*k2*k4*k_1 + a*k1*k5*k_2 + a*k1*k_2*k_3 + a*k1*k_2*k_4 + b*k2*k5*k_1 + b*k2*k_1*k_3 + b*k2*k_1*k_4 + k5*k_1*k_2 + k_1*k_2*k_3 + k_1*k_2*k_4)) p

Saving models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Save the reduced model to an SBML file, and a reaction file:

.. code:: python

      >>> crn.save_sbml("examples/data/sbml/enzyme_simplified.xml")
      >>> crn.save_reaction_file("examples/data/reactions/enzyme_simplified")

Other features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create a model and look at its deficiency and elementary modes:

.. code:: python

      >>> reactions = ['r1: a ->(k1) b + y',
      ...              'r2: y ->(k2) c',
      ...              'r3: b + c ->(k3) a']
      >>> example = from_react_strings(reactions)
      >>> print(example.deficiency)
      1
      >>> print(example.n_complexes, example.n_linkage_classes, example.stoich_matrix.rank())
      (5, 2, 2)
      >>> print(example.t_invariants)
      Matrix([[r1 + r2 + r3]])

Check if the network is weakly reversible:

.. code:: python

      >>> example.is_weakly_rev
      False

We can check how the elementary modes change if *y* is eliminated:

.. code:: python

      >>> example.qss('y')
      >>> print(example.reactions)
      (r3: b + c ->(k3) a, r1_r2: a ->(k1) b + c)
      >>> print(example.deficiency)
      0
      >>> print(example.t_invariants)
      Matrix([[r1_r2 + r3]])
      >>> example.is_weakly_rev
      True

Absolute concentration robustness...

Check if two networks are dynamically equivalent:

.. code:: python

      >>> net1 = from_react_strings(['a ->(k) a + 2b'])
      >>> net2 = from_react_strings(['a ->(2*k) a + b'])
      >>> net1.is_dyn_eq(net2)
      True

Check if a network is an emulation of another:

.. code:: python

      >>> net1 = from_react_strings(['a ->(k) b + c'])
      >>> net2 = from_react_strings(['a ->(k) b'])
      >>> net2.is_emul(net1, morphism = {'a': 'a', 'b': 'b', 'c': 'b'})
      True
      >>> net2.is_dyn_eq(net1)
      False
